Interesting times for Stat Ed

Daniel Kaplan, Macalester College

These are interesting times in statistics education. As with the proverb, living in interesting times can be both blessing and curse. There are opportunities and challenges for all of us in stat ed. 

Let's look at some of the major developments. The last decade has seen the emergence of Data Science as an organizing theme for extracting information from data. Some in stat ed claim data science is merely a rebranding of statistics, a position that doesn't withstand scrutiny. We face a genuine need to collaborate, an unnatural position for many academics. This goes both ways, with computer science educators needing to recognize that they are often naive with respect to statistics and the stat ed community accepting that decision making--the root of the demand for data science--is closely aligned with Bayesian thinking.

The last decade has also brought the acceptance of randomization-based inference as a mainstream approach to teaching. This is a wonderful opportunity to enhance student understanding of inference, but requires careful rethinking of the traditional algebra-based curriculum.

Two other developments can be bewildering to statistical educators. Prompted by the "crisis" in reproducibility, and in the face of a century of conflict about an appropriate basis for statistical inference, the ASA is calling for a course correction toward a "post p < 0.05 world." Still another important development, modern causal inference, is unknown to the vast majority of statistical educators. It conflicts with the central mantra of intro stats-- "correlation is not causation"--and calls for tools for dealing with confounding that are alien to the traditional t-test course.

The biggest challenge to stat ed--one that must be met before we can respond completely to the previous developments--is the crawling pace of integration of modern computing into stat ed. The computer is the essential tool in all areas of the economy, science, and government and the foundation of data science. Yet it's commonplace for intro stats students to see only graphing calculators, a limited and obsolete appliance that is widely found in algebra courses but in no other place in professional work or education.

The StatPREP.org project--a collaboration of the MAA, ASA, and AMATYC, funded by the NSF (DUE-1626337)--is attempting to help stat instructors overcome the challenges of change. The scale is small, only about 1-2% of statistics instructors can participate in StatPREP faculty-development workshops, although the StatPREP materials are available to anyone. 

We have learned a lot about the obstacles to change. Not least among these: most statistics instructors have no training and no professional contact with statistics beyond the intro course. Another is the sprawling historical development of the intro course balkenizing the central inferential concepts into a series of historically contingent settings. A randomization curriculum can provide unity. But facing the simultaneous challenges of requiring a transition to computing and introducing a new paradigm, the authors of leading textbooks have sensibly decided to stick to the balkanized settings.

StatPREP.org is highly computationally oriented, so it may seem a surprise that we are also exploring the alternative strategy: minimizing computation, retaining formulas, but unifying inference. Our new short book, "A  Compact Guide to Classical Inference," brings all the traditional inference settings of intro stats into a common framework: simple modeling and a single test statistic introduced in a novel, streamlined manner. We are literally "F-ing up statistics." Some may see "F-ing" as referring to something other than Fisher's eponymous statistic, particularly since we dispense with the extensive probability tables still found in most textbooks. But we propose that the substantial gains are worth the tiny loss.

The "Compact Guide" is not a textbook. First, it is solely about inference. Second, it is a guide for instructors, not students. We hope the "Compact Guide" can help instructors see a path forward from the traditional course and toward one that can properly embrace covariation, computing, and data. Take a look at StatPREP.org. You may find the "Compact Guide" illuminating or utterly confounding. Whichever, it is an honest attempt to respond to the interesting times in which we live.

